.TH FDISK 8
.SH NAME
fdisk \- create or update a partition table on a hard disk or SSD device
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBfdisk\fR [\fB\-l\fR] [\fB\-q\fR] [\fB\-g c/h/s\fR] [\fIfile\fR]
.br
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 5
.B \-l
list the partition table and exit.
.TP 5
.B \-q
quiet, don't print warnings.
.TP 5
.B -g c/h/s
use this drive geometry (cyliders/heads/sectors). Useful only if 
.B file
is a plain image file, not a device. Geometry is automatically read off disk drives. Use the
.I hdparm=
setting in the 
.I bootopts 
file to manipulate the geometry of hard drives.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
When \fBfdisk\fR starts up, it validates the 
.B file
argument if present, then reads in the partition table from 
.BR file ,
or - if no 
.B file
was specified, from the currently booted drive. 
.PP
.B Fdisk
will exit with an error message if 
.B file
or the booted drive is a floppy.
.B File
must be a raw (character) device unless it's a plain file. If 
.B fdisk 
uses the booted drive, it is converted to raw automatically before opening. The raw restriction
does not apply if the program is compiled with the 
.I CONFIG_BLK_DEV_BIOS
define.
.PP
Image files are treated like devices, but should be accompanied by the 
.B \-g
c/h/s option to define the geomerty. If not present, the geometry will be guessed
from the existing partiton table, which may or may not give correct results.
If the partition table is empty or the MBR signature missing,
the
.B \-g
option is mandatory, and 
.B fdisk
will exit if it's missing.
.PP
Unless the 
.B -l
option is present, 
.B fdisk
will enter interactive mode and allow the user to manipulate the partition
table using the following commands:
.PP
.nf
	Key Description
	b   Set bootable flag
	d   Delete partition
	l   List partition types
	n   Create new partion
	p   Print partition table
	q   Quit fdisk
	t   Set partition type
	w   Write partition table
	?   Help
.fi
.PP
.B Fdisk
will fail on flat images (disks with no partition table), floppy devices and other devices with no partition. Selecting
.I quit
will discard any changes unless preceeded by the
.I write
command.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP 10
elks17# \fBfdisk\fP
.nf
[/dev/rdhdb] Geometry: 7818 cylinders, 16 heads, 63 sectors.
Command (? for help):
.fi
.LP
.B Fdisk 
enters interactive mode.
.TP 10
elks17# \fBfdisk -l\fP
.nf
                      START              END          SECTOR
Device      #:ID   Cyl Head Sect    Cyl Head Sect  Start   Size

/dev/hda1  *1:80     0    1    1     66    15   63     63  67473
/dev/hda2   2:80    67    0    1     200   15   63  67536 135072
/dev/hda3   3:00     0    0    0      0    0    0      0      0
/dev/hda4   4:80   332    0    1     432   15   63 7560000 101808
.fi
.LP
.B Fdisk 
lists the partition table, the asterisk in the ID-column indictating an active
partition.
.SH BUGS
.PP
.B Fdisk
does minimal sanity checking on input, it is possible to create a totaly bogus partition table.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR part (8).
