.TH FSCK 8
.SH NAME
fsck \- perform filesystem consistency check
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBfsck\fR [\fB\-aflrsvw\fR]\fR [\fIdevice\fR]
.br
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 5
.B \-a
List and automatically repair inconsistencies
.TP 5
.B \-f
Force filesystem check
.TP 5
.B \-l
List the files and directories in the filesystem
.TP 5
.B \-r
Prompt user for repairs if inconsistencies are found
.TP 5
.B \-s
List the superblock of the filesystem
.TP 5
.B \-v
Turn on verbose mode
.TP 5
.B \-w
Warn about inodes that can't be cleared
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP 25
.B fsck /dev/rdhda1
# Check filesystem on \fI/dev/rdhda1\fR
.TP 25
.B fsck \-a /dev/rdf1
# Automatically fix errors on \fI/dev/rdf1\fR
.TP 25
.B fsck \-l /dev/rdf0
# List the contents of \fI/dev/rdf0\fR
.TP 25
.B fsck \-avf /dev/rdf1
# Force file system check, automatic repair and verbose output on \fI/dev/rdf0\fR
.nf
tlvc16# fsck -avf /dev/rdf1
Forcing filesystem check on /dev/rdf1.

   112 inodes used (88%)
   322 zones used (89%)

    49 regular files
     8 directories
    40 character device files
    15 block device files
     0 links
     0 symbolic links
------
   112 files
tlvc16#
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fIFsck\fR performs consistency checks on the filesystem residing 
on the specified device. Unless the system is using BIOS IO, the device 
must be a character (raw) device.
.PP
Without options,
.IR fsck
checks and reports but makes noe changes.
When either the \fB\-a\fR or \fB\-r\fR flags are given, the filesystem
will be repaired if errors are found. In the absence of the \fB\-a\fR flag, the
user will be prompted for
every error found. Entering a newline (or a 'y') means 'yes', 'n' means 'no' and 'a'
means 'activate automatic mode'
and \fIfsck\fR will continue as if the \fB\-a\fR flag was present: Fix errors without asking.
Responses are case-insensitive.
.PP
When a filesystem is unmounted cleanly, its superblock is marked as such and 
.IR fsck
will simply exit siliently unless the \fB\-v\fR option is present.
A complete check may still be performed by specifying the
\fR\-f\fR option.
.PP
The normal case is for 
.IR fsck
to run silently. If no errors are found, it just exits.
Adding the \fR\-v\fR option activates verbose mode and 
.IR fsck
will report statistics about the filesystem if checked, otherwise that it was 
clean and not check was required.
.PP
.I Fsck
should always be run on unmounted filesystems.
Running it on a mounted filesystem is generally meaningless because the filesystem is likely
to be modified while \fIfsck\fR runs. Modifying a mounted filsystem is outright dangerous and
will likely cause filesystem damage and system crash. 
.PP
To repair the root filesystem (which cannot be unmounted), first 
kill any and all processes. 
Type \fIsync\fR to force any buffered changes to disk,
run \fIfsck\fR with the appropriate options on the root filesystem and immediately reboot the
computer via the \fIreboot\fR command.
.PP
It is necessary to kill all processes before repairing the root filesystem
to prevent them from modifying any disk blocks while \fIfsck\fR is running.
This is only necessary for the root filesystem, any other filesystem can
simply be unmounted before it is checked.
.SH BUGS
.IR fsck
works with minix version 1 filesystems only. The maximum supported filesystem size is 64MB.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR mkfs (8),
.BR mount (8).
