.TH MAKEBOOT 8
.SH NAME
makeboot \- prepare device as a system boot device
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBmakeboot\fP [\fB\-M|F\fP] [\fB\-s\fP] [\fB\-f file\fR] \fIdevice\fR
.br
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 5
.B \-M
Write the TLVC MBR (Master Boot Record) to the first sector of the specified device.
.TP 5
.B \-F
Create a 'flat' (unpartitioned) device. 
.TP 5
.B \-f file
Take the bootblock from the specified instead of the current root device.
.TP 5
.B \-s
Copy system files from the current root to the target device.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP 5
Copy the bootblock from the current root partition to \fB/dev/hda4\fP:
.sp
.nf
# makeboot /dev/rhda4
System on /dev/rhda1: Minix (CHS 7818/16/63 at offset 63)
Target on /dev/rhda4: Minix (CHS 7818/16/63 at offset 7560000)
Bootblock written
.fi
.TP 5
Write the TLVC MBR til the specified device:
.sp
.nf
# makeboot \-M /dev/rhda4
Writing MBR on /dev/rhda
.fi
.sp
Notice that while a partition (/dev/rhda4) is specified on the command line, 
.B makeboot
changes that into a device (/dev/rhda) since that's where the MBR goes.
.TP 5
Replace the bootblock on \fB/dev/rhda4\fP with the one in \fB./minix.bin\fP and copy system files to the target partition.
.sp
.nf
# makeboot \-s \-f ./minix.bin /dev/hda4
Target on /dev/rhda4: Minix (CHS 7818/16/63 at offset 7560000)
Bootblock written
Copying /linux to /tmp/mnt/linux
Copying /bootopts to /tmp/mnt/bootopts
System copied
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBmakeboot\fR prepares a device or partition for booting by installing a 
bootloader and \- if the \fB-s\fP option is present \- some system files.
The partition or device must must be a raw (character) device and already contain
a file system, which may be either FAT (MSDOS) or Minix.
.PP
Without options, a bootblock is copied from the current root device to the target. 
A different bootblock may be specifying via the \fB-f\fP option, see examples above.
Such transfer requires that the running system and the target has the same file system types.
.B makeboot
will complain and exit if this is not the case.
.PP
If the 
.B \-s
option is present, the TLVC kernel (\fI/linux\fR) and the kernel configuration file 
.I /bootopts
will be copied to the target.
.PP
The 
.B \-M
option may be used to write a Master Boot Record (MBR) to the target device. The 
MBR will preserve the partition information currently present in the first sector of the target device.
This operation is similar to the MSDOS 
'fdisk /MBR' command.
Refer to the
.BR MBR (5)
manpage for details about the TLVC MBR.
.PP
.B makeboot
also supports 'flat devices' - aka unpartitioned devices. While floppies are always unpartitioned,
hard disks usually have partitions and a Master Boot Record. By writing the 
.I bootblock 
to the first sector(s) of the disk, the entire disk becomes a single partition. The
.I \-F
option does this.
.PP
.B makeboot
is used by the 
.BR sys (8)
command to build a fully pouplated and bootable TLVC system from floppy or from another disk.
.PP
\fBfloppy\fP:
on the specified devices.
.SH BUGS
.B makeboot
cannot replace the MBR on the current root device.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR sys (8),
.BR mkfs (8),
.BR mkfat (8),
.BR minix (5),
.BR FAT (5),
.BR MBR (5),
.BR boot (8).
